The Art of Fielding
###################
:date: 2012-11-24 11:51
:author: admin
:category: books
:slug: 2326
:status: draft
:private: true

| 4 stars
| As a general rule I'm not a huge fan of baseball-as-philosophy. Bull Durham makes me roll my eyes, and George Will can go to hell. Thankfully, the Art of Fielding does not stoop to that kind of indulgence. Instead it's a fine, enjoyable book, although not a very subtle one.

The book isn't without its share of first-novel faults. The middle drags a bit before introducing the novel's actual conflict surprisingly late. Harbach is a little bit tiresome in his insistence that readers not accidentally miss any of his themes. Adding dialogue with a suddenly-introduced psychologist in the denouement? Ick. Also, using Melville as a constant touchstone and then naming your protagonist "Skrimshander" is inexcusably precious.

But that can be forgiven. There was only one (major) part that really left me scratching my head. And though I admit that I'm guessing, I suspect that if I were gay I would be more than a little annoyed by Harbach conflating romantic love between men with the homoeroticism of male fellowship--the latter of which, though the author would probably disagree, seems to me to be inextricable from a male refusal to embrace adulthood; when faced (not infrequently) with this idea as an explanation for their orientation, I understand that gay men get understandably upset. For all of his aspirations to sensitivity, I think Harbach is implicitly leveling this insult. Guert Affenlight's feelings for Owen are never really explained to the reader (or their evolution even recounted!), and consequently the relationship comes off as a kind of pathetic, pederastic infatuation. The relationship between Schwartz and Henry is rich and well-drawn, but putting it on the same continuum as Owen's romantic life seems silly and insulting to the latter character. I found this block-headedness surprising to read from an author who seems to use gender-neutral terms like "freshperson" unironically (I should note that for all I know Harbach himself is gay--though I kind of doubt it).

With all of that said, this is a very easy book to read, and one that inspires huge affection for every one of its characters. It's a real pleasure, and I wouldn't hesitate to recommend it.
