leaving Sunlight
################
:date: 2014-09-02 15:08
:author: admin
:category: Uncategorized
:slug: 2839
:status: draft
:private: true

I remember when I first heard about the Sunlight Foundation, back in the days when the earth was young and I was still a Drupal programmer. Slashdot (Slashdot!) made it sound like an exciting new thing that was going to use technology to make our country work better. I was working at Echoditto, building websites for big nonprofits and surrounded by rightly-celebrated veterans of the Dean campaign's web operation. No one had any idea what parts of democracy would be changed by technology, but popular opinion leaned toward "all of them." Sunlight was going to be in the middle of that upheaval.

I was deeply intimidated, though. I was a lowly PHP programmer! The people at Sunlight were using still-exotic technologies like Rails, and throwing open houses where they'd all wear custom lab coats (an admittedly less practical fashion than the hoodies that civic hackers seem to have settled on). I was much too shy to attend, but I did get a thrill from having Sunlight's first API incorporate some data I had scraped from house.gov.

A restrospectively implausible series of events left me not only working at Sunlight, but leading its team of twenty-two engineers, designers, political scientists and researchers. I've never been shy about describing it as a "dream job", because it was--not only one that I enjoyed tremendously, but a fantasy that I never expected to come true.

All of this makes it weird to decide to leave. But after six years, it's time. I'm headed to `Mapbox <http://mapbox.com>`__, a company that I've admired since before it was a company, and the only place around that makes me feel the kind of vertiginous professional awe that Sunlight did six years ago. You will hear me talking a lot more about Mapbox, but right now I can't resist indulging in some self-indulgent reflection.

There's always more that one could do, more that you wish you could have accomplished given more resources or different politics or just fewer distractions. But I am proud of my time at Sunlight.

- When I stepped into the labs director role, we were struggling to hit a 2 million API call goal that we had promised a funder. We made it, but after the sprinting had finished, I realized that our APIs were probably the most important thing we did. They freed the work from the limits of our own imaginations, opening it to a wider universe of devs and designers. So we invested deliberately in our APIs -- improving documentation and curricula and support libraries, doing outreach, adding features. Sunlight's APIs now handle about a billion calls every year, powering civic startups and academic researchers and data journalism and global-scale nonprofits and presidential campaigns and kids learning Javascript.
- The Clearspending project grew directly out of the work that Kaitlin Devine, Kevin Webb and I had done on Subsidyscope. With the addition of Drew Vogel's considerable talents, it became something that changed how Sunlight was perceived in Washington and the international NGO community. It also produced enacted legislation, congressional testimony and infuriated bureaucrats. Good times.
- It's probably less visible, but I'm proud to have pushed Sunlight to move in new directions, from `engaging with rulemaking <http://docketwrench.sunlightfoundation.com>`__ to `embracing political science <http://sunlightfoundation.com/blog/author/ldrutman/>`__ to cultivating the kind of detailed engagement with governance that helped make Labs alums a big part of our newest generation of civil servants (though this pride didn't stop me from throwing a fit over each departure to government).
- I am personally responsible for the vast majority of Sunlight project names that incorporate terrible puns.

But being a manager inevitably means slowly transforming into a sort of nonpractitioning doofus. So mostly I'm just proud to have made it possible for a lot of brilliant people do really great work. I wouldn't want to claim credit for `Scout <http://scout.sunlightfoundation.com>`__, or `Open States <http://openstates.org>`__, or `our mobile apps <http://sunlightfoundation.com/congress>`__, or our `real-time influence-tracking work <http://realtime.influenceexplorer.com/>`__, or `the new FARA <http://foreign.influenceexplorer.com/>`__, or any number of other great things that have come from Labs. But I did find a lot of money for them, and I did my best to make sure their authors had what they needed to shine. And, I hasten to add, there is more great stuff coming, from a new OpenCongress to a reinvention of Influence Explorer.

It really was a dream job. But it's been an uncertain year, as Sunlight has faced staff turnover, new leadership, and changes in how we fund projects. It's been a year of goodbyes and of waiting. When the opportunity to join Mapbox came up, I was surprised to realize that I was ready to leave.

In truth, I doubt anything could have stopped me from being tempted away -- Mapbox represents a challenge so exciting that I would've felt like a coward if I had let it slip away. Even the best job can carry a risk of stagnation. But realizing that Sunlight deserved a fresh start for its next chapter made the decision easier. Which is not to say easy.

I have to confess that I'm also looking forward to working on data and products again instead of just human emotions, which is what team management, office politics and grantwriting all boil down to. I could use a break from that last one, in particular. There's something a little bit thrilling about composing an essay that moves millions of dollars around. It needs to be inspiring but not unrealistic. Cliched, but not \*too\* cliched. Emphatic but still humble. I got pretty good at it, and will happily offer advice on how many times per page to include the word "innovative" in your pitch (at what I think you will agree are alarming freelance rates).

But convincing a handful of people to cut you a check for some probably-dead plutocrat's money isn't without its irritations. This is particularly true if those people aren't fully engaged, or are being asked to execute a philanthropic strategy that contains contradictions. It's not always like that--I have worked with many very, very smart people in these interactions, people like Stacy Donahue, Bob Horton, Anthea Watson Strong and Janet Haven, people who make you work harder and better even when you disagree with them. But there are unfortunately also funders who don't read the proposal, or think technology always trumps history, or assume all problems have market solutions, or who are mostly focused on going to conferences. It's a shame. Perhaps it's an inevitable outcome when old institutions hire people to invent the future from an industry with no past.

What is certain is that foundations' entrance into the digital age has almost uniformly exacerbated their thirst for novelty and given rise to the implicit notion that sustained investments in advocacy and organizing can be replaced by one-time capital purchases of software. It's a bit shocking to realize that an institution is willing to pay for a software developer's time coding, but not for rent on the office where she works or even the electricity that powers her laptop.

To be frank, these tendencies often worked to Sunlight's and my own benefit. We could construct highly technical proposals with relative ease, and less easily construct defensible mechanisms for subsequently cross-subsidizing the kinds of overhead and advocacy efforts that are utterly essential but not distributable via Github. Still, it's a pretty silly way to have to do things, and it's preventing important work from happening throughout the field.

More personally, it amounted to an elaborate dance that consumed a huge amount of time and energy, and if I were ever to miss a step I might have had to lay somebody off. High stakes are only fair when you go hat in hand seeking such an improbable level of generosity. But I did come to miss doing the work itself.

But enough grousing. Any job has its frustrations. You will not hear me say that Sunlight is anything but an amazing place to work, that government transparency is less than essential, or that money's role in politics is a solved or ignorable problem. If I wish that fundraising worked differently, it's only because I'm kicking myself for not finding a way to spend those dollars better. And I'm pleased to say that my gratitude toward the vast majority of funders is uncomplicatedly deep. You can read the preceding as sour grapes over the ones that got away, if you want.

Closing this chapter is bittersweet, but I know that leadership of the team will be in good hands with James Turk, who is not only a longtime Labs veteran but the leader and chief architect of what might be our greatest single success, the Open States Project. Importantly, he is also the only person on staff with a knowledge of professional wrestling that surpasses my own. James has been hidden away up in Boston for the past few years, leading the Open States team, but he'll be returning to D.C. in the coming weeks for the transition, then moving back permanently.

The list of people to whom I am grateful is long, and I'm terrified that I would leave someone out if I tried to write it out. So I'll just thank Ellen, who taught me a lot, created a great institution, and gave me a generously long leash; Clay, for having faith in me to do this; and everyone with whom I have worked here, especially on the Labs team.

I guess that's it.
