rambo syndrome
##############
:date: 2007-04-16 23:57
:author: admin
:category: politics
:slug: 200
:status: draft

Tim Lee `links <http://www.angryblog.org/?p=771>`__ without comment to `a blog post <http://freestudents.blogspot.com/2007/04/dozens-massacred-in-gun-free-zone-again.html>`__ arguing that the tragedy at Virginia Tech could have been stopped by students being allowed to carry weapons. I've seen a bunch of comments to this effect, too.

My own feelings about gun control aside, this seems like a pretty bad example for second amendment enthusiasts to attach themselves to. This tragedy seems to have been precipitated by the shooter having an emotional meltdown and deciding to hurt some people. Let's grant that gun control has no effect on the professional criminal class — a deliberate effort to acquire a gun will eventually result in success. That's not the situation here, though. Someone decided to hurt other people, and they knew where to get a gun. If guns were more tightly controlled, the chances of the shooter acquiring a gun during the period during which he was homicidal presumably would have been diminished.

So what's the marginal cost in lives of increased or decreased per-capita gun ownership? Does heightened gun ownership protect people by allowing citizens to avert tragedies, or cost lives by potentiating violent situations that, in the absence of a readily-available firearm, might not have been deadly?

You might disagree, but the answer seems pretty clear to me: it's a lot easier to use a gun tragically than heroically. There are many ways to take a firearm and cause havoc. Using one to save the day is only possible with luck, good judgment and — sometimes — a great deal of skill.

The odds of someone in a violent situation being able to defend themselves safely and effectively are likely to remain low relative to the odds of the aggressor in a violent situation being able to use a firearm to tragic effect.
