soldiers
########
:date: 2015-06-23 14:54
:author: admin
:category: Uncategorized
:slug: 2950
:status: draft

I am delighted that the confederate flag is becoming universal anathema. For me, this is just an aesthetic preference; for many black Americans I know it must be much much more. I am a little surprised at the vehemence that's accompanying it. But if it gets the job done...

In the days after the South Carolina shooting a number of writers connected Dylann Roof's actions to the existence of lingering symbols of the confederacy in his environment. I don't mean to trivialize the moral weight of those symbols. But tragedy invites the transformation of symbolic preferences into the means of averting actual tragedy. This strikes me as rarely plausible. But it's pointless to quibble given the odiousness of the motivations behind the flag's display.

   Who will speak for the treasonous rebels who fought on behalf of slavery? They're the real victims here. https://t.co/LymlkkUA7w

   — David Roberts (@drvox) `June 23, 2015 <https://twitter.com/drvox/status/613423371561250816>`__

.. raw:: html

   <p>

.. raw:: html

   <script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

.. raw:: html

   </p>

For a given soldier serving today, how much moral weight obtains from a studied consideration of U.S. foreign policy, and how much is an accident of birth, of family, of economic circumstance? I suppose opinions will vary. Certainly the soldiers themselves would tell you that their service to freedom is one they came to freely, unswayed by thoughtless causality. I'm sure the same would even be true in ages past, when those soldiers' worlds and ideas were more severely circumscribed.

I won't argue that the confederacy's leaders, including my ancestors, don't deserve that level of scorn.

But

The decision to commemorate the confederate dead must have been, in some ways, a practical one. So much had been spent fighting to keep the country together.

A couple of things about this. First: remove any personal feelings I might have. I don't

Leaders of the confederacy
