Uncle Dirk
##########
:date: 2016-06-10 14:27
:author: admin
:category: Uncategorized
:slug: 3013
:status: draft

Last November my uncle Dirk died alone in a trash-strewn camper, full of cancer and heroin. "Entered the church in glory" was the less precise characterization used by the pastor. That was kind, but c'mon.

Dirk had the misfortune of being born in both the sixties and my grandfather's house. For many years he was not able to live apart from his parents, and then one day discovered they had become too old to live without him. To his immense, enduring credit he stayed to care for and protect them, watching the last of his prospects dwindle as he did. After their deaths he must have felt free, but it was short-lived. His inheritance-launched auto repair business failed. I would later find myself picking some of those rusted tools from among dry leaves in the woods around the camper.

His health declined and he retreated into bitterness. Or so it seemed to me in the stories my mom relayed. Dirk and I exchanged some emails once my aunt bought him a smartphone and he got online. But he was proud and self-aware and besides I knew I didn't have it in me to save him. I had hoped he would come to my wedding, but it was too much. I had hoped my mom would succeed in getting him into real housing, but it was too late. His life ended sooner than any of us expected, and I understood all sixty years of it to have been a tragedy.

And it was that. But coming here for his memorial I realize it was more: he had friends, and good times, I was grateful to learn. And he loved rock & roll and tearing machines apart, which I already knew. There were pictures at the memorial

Whatever inheritance compelled that obsession with mechanisms and tinkering and tools, we share it. There was more to Dirk than his last years and it did us all good to remember that.

He was a kind, sunny, goofy kid who the world ruined so completely that it must have left him dizzy. I'll remember Dirk, and miss him, and if I have a son I will understand what failing him could mean.
