in defense of shock jocks
#########################
:date: 2007-04-12 10:51
:author: admin
:category: pop culture
:slug: 195
:status: draft
:private: true

I've gotta say, I'm pretty surprised that this Don Imus story is sticking around for this long. What he said was deplorable, but he's a *goddamn talk radio host*. It's his job to vamp for hours on end every single day. You'd find yourself saying some remarkably stupid things, too, if you were put in that situation. Odds are that you'd have a crass, mean sense of humor, too (the market selects for that kind of host), so those stupid things you'd be spouting would probably be despicable, too.

If someone devoted a month of time to listen to any nationally syndicated shock jock's show, I'm pretty confident that they could find something equally vile and idiotic to mount a public campaign over. That doesn't excuse Imus or any of the other jerks who provide meaningless filler between commercial breaks, but it does make me wonder why the hell I'm still reading about Don Imus on a daily basis. I'll admit that the overlap between Imus's guest list and the punditocracy is interesting and unique to his show. But it's not *that* interesting. To the extent that this incident will destroy a broadcast outlet for journalistic narcissism, I'm all for it. It'd be great if it could be done a little more quickly and quietly, though.

As for Imus himself, I guess I'm against any further punishment — we've all got a . The guy is `not exactly the picture of health <http://www.corporate-casual.com/2007/04/10/the-portrait-of-the-opposite-of-dorian-gray/>`__, his ridiculous wig & cowboy hat notwithstanding. Mother Nature is the ultimate FCC regulator. Give grandpa a break, shrink his audience, and let his boring radio show fade into the sunset.
