besides, your navel is already exposed, ready for gazing
########################################################
:date: 2007-05-29 22:28
:author: admin
:category: misc
:slug: 255
:status: draft
:private: true

There are a lot of things I like about the beach. Laying in the sun, drinking during the day, finding the time to read things not delivered by RSS — it's all great.

But I also have a deeper attachment to it. I like the beach because it provides perspective. I can't think of anything I'm able to directly encounter that's older, bigger or more unchanging. It's not exactly subtle about these qualities, either. You just have to sit still for a little while and consider the horizon. Even guys like me can get it pretty fast.

I don't mean to come off as mopey or brooding — conflicted, panicked and intentionally-distracted is usually a little closer to it. The beach is good at curing the first two, removing the need for the last. I can sit on the sand and contemplate my mortality all day if I want without having to resort to so much as a morbid joke for diversion. Not that I do (there's usually terrible science fiction to be read and cowardly-gradual wading to be done, after all). But I can; it's easy. Like I said, the inevitability of it all is right there, staring me in the face, washing up on my toes. Worrying is so pointless as to be excluded from consideration.

Unfortunately, it's not working as well this year. I'm not sure why, exactly. Maybe the waves aren't big or loud enough. Maybe it's that I haven't gotten sunburned yet. My most promising lead is the flittering bursts of awful music coming from the rental houses behind us, lining the shore ("Cat Scratch Fever" is a representative example). There's a sense that just over my shoulder someone isn't getting it, thinks the sound of the surf is like construction noise from an eons-long project devoted to smashing rocks into smaller rocks (and disassembling the matchstick beachfront houses along the way). This really shouldn't distract me, but it does. I suppose it's the same thing that makes me want to be sure everyone at a party is having fun before I can relax.

None of this will keep me from getting nicely tanned and relaxed. It does make me wonder whether I'm adopting my parents' beach habits, though. I used to hate how they insisted on finding a spot on the shore away from everyone else, and how they've pick beach towns without boardwalks or other kids — their favorite beaches always involved ferry rides and nature preserves. But now I think I get it. A beach chair, a book and a beverage: those are all the reminders you should permit yourself of what year it is, what beach it is, what species you are. You can bring the inflatable beach crap and boogie boards some days — it's fun, it's fine. But that's not what the ocean is really there for.
