New York
########
:date: 2010-02-22 13:15
:author: admin
:category: Uncategorized
:slug: 1281
:status: draft
:private: true

This weekend was stressful: I had to rent a car and drive, with my mother, up to Brewster, NY for my grandfather's memorial service.  He was a complicated man who left behind a complicated family, and I can't say that I'm always at ease when I'm around them.  Not that I don't enjoy each of my maternal relatives on an individual basis -- I do -- but being in that place inevitably calls forth dynamics that are, frankly, pretty poisonous.  And I don't just mean how my uncle had to get rabies shots after being bitten by one of the many racoons that he's taken to feeding on the porch of my grandfather's condo.  Getting everyone in a room -- *those* rooms -- is like bringing softly humming tuning forks together, producing a horrible mounting resonance that shakes the plaster from the walls and leaves me clutching my head.  Still, it was good that I went, and maybe the weekend's exercise in hagiography will serve to exorcise as well.

Anyway, I spent most of the weekend in the car, and have two revelations to share:

- You can rent EZ-Pass when you rent your car!  I haven't gotten the final bill yet, and should perhaps hold off on a full-throated endorsement until then.  Still, seems well worth the $2.50/day to me.
- Remember Matt Pinfield, the bald guy from MTV who seemed to care about music and know what he was doing even after it was clear that no one else there did?  Well, he's continuing that tradition at New York's WRXP.
