on Blippi
#########
:date: 2024-12-04 09:46
:author: admin
:category: Uncategorized
:slug: 3650
:status: draft

Blippi is a YouTube personality who makes videos to entertain toddlers. He wears orange glasses, orange suspenders, and a less consistently-colored beanie.

That Blippi is an idiot may be taken for granted. Kids have not been alive long enough to become bored by the many things that sophisticated adults like ourselves are bored by. With rare exceptions, any adult who wants to find common ground with a child must either suppress their intellect or embody a deep, bovine patience that amounts to the same thing.

I do not think Stevin John, the creator and original portrayer of Blippi, is an idiot. To the contrary: after briefly (and somewhat notoriously) experimenting with other kinds of YouTube content, John successfully identified his niche and then grew it into what seems to be a successful business and is undeniably a far-reaching one. Blippi's presence has expanded to toys, additional characters, foreign-language markets, syndication deals, live shows, and, notably, hiring other actors to portray Blippi.

But neither is John a genius. Or at least, he does not have the kind of genius that we associate with the greatest children's entertainers. Jim Henson; Fred Rogers; Shari Lewis; Joe Brumm: all are capable of endowing their creations not only with a charismatic magnetism, but an aching and sweet sadness that we parents--as we choose a proxy to care for our children while we do the dishes, or talk to our bosses, or look at our phones--take comfort in inflicting on ourselves. *This is what it feels like to watch them grow*. *This is how I want them to feel about the world.* *This honors the preciousness of the moment I am about to ignore.*

Stevin John is a father, and I think he probably knows this feeling. But it is impossible to imagine Blippi ever evoking it. That is not what Blippi is here to do. Blippi is a system.

There is a hierarchy of Blippi symbols, with varying consistency. The orange glasses and suspenders and beanie will always be there. So too the royalty-free chiptune arpeggio, added in post-production. Next, the robotic laugh--*haha*, like in a text message--used as a filler word. These are reliable presences. But Blippi often forgets to smile. When he does, it seldom reaches his eyes.

Perhaps this is understandable. That the videos can reliably hold kids' attention is all the more remarkable for their modesty. Nathan Robinson, in what was (prior to essay) the internet's most important example of Blippy commentary, calls Blippy's world "sterile". (He also notes that he "cannot help but think of Donald Trump when I see Blippi" and "[thought] of Marx continuously when I’m watching Blippi".) This is hard to dispute. Typically, Blippi has secured access to some kind of facility--a construction site, a fire station, the maintenance shed of a ski resort--and will caper about it at shocking length, inventorying all of the objects within it, narrating the banal actions he uses to traverse it, and looking for opportunities to discuss colors, numbers, and other things lessons that everyone vaguely understands to be part of early childhood education. These places are mostly empty of people. It's just you and Blippi.

As I write this, Blippi's YouTube channel contains more than 500 videos--almost 11 continuous days' worth of material. Many of these videos' promotional art includes badges highlighting their length. *30MIN, 60MIN, 90MIN*. Even *2H*. So give him credit: Blippi shows up. Blippi puts in the work. If his mind sometimes wanders, well, who among us? Perhaps Blippi also needs to find time to unload the dishwasher. Surely Blippi would like to reply to some text messages.

It all feels a bit like Stevin John purchased a course about being a children's entertainer from an Instagram ad, and is now turning its allegedly expert-supplied checklists into success with nothing but a modest budget and superhuman endurance. About the same as contemporary parenting, in other words. Though presumably with significantly more advertising revenue.

Our son is our third child and first Blippi fan. How to account for this? There are the steadily declining standards that greet each additional child, of course--if the last one's ipad allotment didn't turn them into a psychopath, perhaps we can relax just a *bit* more--but I think it is mostly the fact of his being a boy. Like our peers, we entered parenthood intent on avoiding the arbitrary gender signals that we understood to be responsible for many of the world's obvious inequities. It is unnerving to have the emphatic ideas about gender that you absorbed from Tumblr replaced by new ones derived from caring for a child. On the whole I recommend it.

But it's humbling, too, as you realize that avoiding pink or blue decorations is utterly meaningless in the face of a small human's innate drive to understand certain things about its world. Megafauna are of high importance, of course (ducks say quack, cows say moo). But their minds are absolutely starving to understand family structure. It's fine if some of their classmates have two moms, or two dads, or no dad, or whatever, no big deal. But they absolutely *must* understand these configurations, and identify who is doing what, and begin to emulate them as soon as possible.

So, boyness. Evolutionary biologists say that males' lower level of parental investment in offspring naturally leads to intra-sex competition for mates, and that this naturally selects for organisms that are adept at violence--or, slightly more charitably, adept at manipulating their environment with force. This is the best I've been able to manage for making sense of the focus on trucks, construction equipment, emergency vehicles. Not all boys, of course, of course.

I have heard it suggested (perhaps on Tumblr) that maleness may have evolved as a form of parasitism, by which some organisms successfully offload the parental investment associated with

Maleness as parasitism, inextricable from force, manipulation of the world, construction vehicles.

Thisnis indelicate but Weightlifting, musicianship. Quantitatively very good with kids. fucking your wife. One suspects that not that long ago Blippi was playing acoustic guitar in a dorm room and doing quite well for himself.

Children’s entertainment is at its worst when it makes you feel like your children might be as stupid as its tedious content suggests. This is how childless adults see your sons and daughters. Yes, charming, they will say. Someday the kids will be adults, they will happily acknowledge, with as good a chance of being interesting as any of us. Before then they will need to listen to the Garbage Truck song several thousand more times. To survive it, their parents must be allowed to believe in a secret inner light. Entertain my children, but seduce me as well.

Are we just killing time? The sheer volume or his output suggests this is how he understands the problem of childhood. I don’t believe it. the Blippi heresy is a lie.
