a la carte, aspirational media and paternalism
##############################################
:date: 2013-07-29 16:35
:author: admin
:category: Uncategorized
:slug: 2584
:status: draft

The pay-TV landscape is evolving in ways that are both encouraging and confusing, as `today's David Carr column demonstrates <http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/29/business/media/vcrs-past-is-guiding-televisions-future.html>`__.

Comcast will probably never be forced to let its customers choose whether they wish to pay for Spike TV. But it doesn't matter: soon enough you'll probably stop buying programming from Comcast. HBO gets all the press for its refusal to sell streaming (even as they invest in all the infrastructure that would enable an eventual change in policy). But they're an edge case. Most cable series can be bought on iTunes, the sports leagues are debuting streaming offerings with varying levels of foot-dragging, and ESPN -- the crown jewel of basic cable -- offers a surprising amount of premium programming through various apps and platforms. Legacy agreements inject a considerable amount of arbitrary hassles, but we seem to be headed toward a kind of soft a la carte.

I continue to find this encouraging. I suppose I'm convinced that `Yglesias is right about the economic inefficiency of unbundling <http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2013/05/mccain_s_la_carte_cable_bill_is_bad_deal_for_consumers.html>`__. But I don't care! I consume so much less video media now that I've cut the cord. I spend maybe half as

But this only holds if you assume that people want to hold their consumption of My own cord-cutting experience

 
