slaves to success
#################
:date: 2013-12-15 18:53
:author: admin
:category: Uncategorized
:slug: 2699
:status: draft
:private: true

This `food-oriented Q&A with Ezra <http://www.foodandwine.com/blogs/2013/12/13/the-hungry-crowd-ezra-klein>`__ is a fun read, but one little point popped out:

   | **You've written some interesting defenses of processed food. Do you think people are too quick to dismiss it?**
   | I think there is an oddly-drawn line between declassé processed foods and haute processed foods. Restaurants like Momofuku and El Bulli serve highly processed foods, but a lot of the foodies who would think it's gross to go to McDonald's would say, "oh yeah, absolutely Momofuku's terrific." I like David Chang's ecumenical explanations of what he likes in food, because if you don't think McDonald's is delicious, you are the problem. I know a lot of people who get into food and all of a sudden they're shittin' on a Big Mac. McDonald's has spent billions of dollars figuring out how to make a Big Mac taste good. They have succeeded.

I completely agree with the larger point. But I do wonder if this doesn't fully acknowledge how arbitrary everything -- including the Big Mac -- is. Certainly McDonald's has spent huge sums of money studying the Big Mac, how it's used and perceived, and how to produce it reliably and efficiently.

But have they changed it? Maybe, but if they have it seems like it must have been subtle, so as to avoid prompting outrage among customers who like the current version of the product.
