there can be no peace
#####################
:date: 2008-06-26 17:56
:author: admin
:category: Uncategorized
:slug: 585
:status: draft

| Adrienne offers an olive branch in the form of a `thoughtful, fair-minded post <http://dredgereport.wordpress.com/2008/06/25/trafficking-in-stereotypes/>`__ that acknowledges the failures of pedestrians, cyclists and drivers, and suggests a way forward, toward comity. I believe the plan involves having our children go to pacifist summer camps together.
| To which I can only say: no! Never! Bicycling is the one true mode of transportation, and `Sheldon Brown <http://www.sheldonbrown.com/repair/index.html>`__ is its prophet! Unbelievers will burn like dried chaff before the ravenous fire of our spoked righteousness!

EDIT TO MAKE NON-OFFENSIVE:

Hmm. It may be time to retreat from this analogy: the more I think about it, the more I realize the age-old bike/car conflict fits the fantasies of crazed antisemitic radicals better than their own conflict: unlike Jewish people, automotive interests actually *have* infiltrated the American government and perpetrated `secret conspiracies <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_American_Streetcar_Scandal>`__ to consolidate their power and pervert its culture. Somebody

(This is the point at which I retreat from the metaphor before it becomes even more horribly offensive, since the metaphor-i-verse reality actually automobile interests actually *do* run our society and engage in massive secret conspiracies to further their own interests)

More seriously, I would encourage everyone to give biking a serious try as a means of transportation before they draw any conclusions about how we should mutually navigate our cities. For one thing, I think you'd like it. For another, I think it would alter your perspective. I don't mean to imply that I disagree with anything Adrienne said, particularly. But I also don't buy that users of each mode of transportation ought to own up to and embrace the vitriol directed their way in equal measure. There's still no reason I can come up with to justify that.

I'll leave you with this, which is a better and more temperate explanation of the view from a bike saddle than I've managed. It's from Yglesias's comments, but written by Missy, formerly of D.C. and still of `Listen Missy <http://listenmissy.com/blog/>`__ fame — how about that?

   | There are reckless bicyclists--I've nearly been the victim of several while crossing the light when it was my turn to do so. I do not condone riding the wrong way or assume that drivers can read your mind when you are weaving in & out of cars.
   | But, as a cyclist in New York City, I can say that there is a reason why I, at least, run red lights (incidentally not as justification by way of pedestrians jaywalking) and find a way to get ahead of traffic at stoplights, even if it means crossing in front of cars to get to the middle to ride in between the two lanes: safety, believe it or not. When you're on two wheels you quickly realize how important it is to be in front of traffic so that cars and trucks can see you and so that you're not taking in lungfuls of exhaust.
   | And to the pedestrians out there who like to complain about the cyclists of the world: unless you jaywalk, unseen from between parked cars, I see you and I'm not going to hit you. I assure you of this. Cyclists, especially urban cyclists \*have\* to develop quick instincts for their own & others' safety. Pedestrians are often startled because they're not paying attention.
