yes, I am going to spin off as many wild tangents as possible
#############################################################
:date: 2008-08-19 21:25
:author: admin
:category: misc
:slug: 657
:status: draft

Responding to my Crab Chip assertions, new commenter Matt:

   Ok, do you mean to demean Utz's Crab Chip in particular, or 'Old Bay' style crab seasoning as such? Either way you are mistaken. It sounds condescending, but it in fact took me years to realize that Old Bay is no joke, no put-on, in no way kitsch. The ingredient list on the side of the box is illuminating (cardamom ?!). The Crab Chip is a well-executed vehicle for the laudable achievement that is Maryland crab seasoning. Sometimes, when one isn't in the mood for dessert, the Carolina-style just won't do.

I won't respond to the comment itself (other than to note that Matt's email address ends in .de, making it entirely possible and perhaps even likely that this comment represents a Teutonic ploy to destabilize American unity in the waning days of the Bush presidency).

But let's talk about cardamom. I'm going to come right out and say it: overrated. The last time I knowingly had it was at Arax, an Armenian coffee shop near Charles' folks' house. "Would you like to try an Armenian coffee?" the barista asked. Sure, why not. The answer came quickly. If I wanted my espresso to taste like a pine tree, I'd... well, I'm not sure what I'd do. Probably just buy some more coffee at Arax, as it would almost certainly be easier than whatever pine-tree-felling-and-processing operation I could come up with as an alternative. But the point is that I don't want my coffee to taste like a pine tree.

None of this, of course, should be taken as an indictment of Arax's other fine offerings, a diminution of the enormity of the Armenian genocide, or as casting aspersions on the awesomeness of System of a Down's first single. But cardamom: a relic of a spice. I'm confident that once globalization has run its course, cardamom-using cultures will make the transition to ranch sauce the same as the rest of us.
