a return to characteristically self-absorbed form
#################################################
:date: 2008-02-19 20:58
:author: admin
:category: personal
:slug: a-return-to-characteristically-self-absorbed-form
:status: published
:save_as: 2008/02/19/a-return-to-characteristically-self-absorbed-form/index.html
:url: 2008/02/19/a-return-to-characteristically-self-absorbed-form/
:private: true

Last Wednesday's annual candy heart rumination aside, I haven't really written much here since getting back from New Orleans. It feels like I've gotten worse and worse at recording what I've been up to, which is of course unfair both to myself and to the historians of the future. So:

- I flew to San Francisco and went to some meetings about a social network for lesbians, where they can be free from the flagrantly heteronormative "poke" frame. Then there was some emergency pre-Valentine's chocolate acquisition and a business development meeting `here <http://www.slanteddoor.com/>`__ with a prospective client. For those unfamiliar with the lingo, "business development" means talking about how great the internet is while the company buys you bourbon. It's easier than it probably sounds.
  Nicco piloted our top-down rental convertible toward SFO in characteristically terrifying fashion, and soon I was sitting in the airport bar, almost exactly 24 hours after I had landed. I chatted with a nice couple who were in town for some sort of trade show. They expressed amazement at my phone and irritation at having to press one to get English voicemail prompts. I opted to pick my battles and focused on getting the bartender's attention. This proved to be a bad idea.
  It didn't seem that way at first. I got on the plane and was pleasantly surprised to find that I had a whole row to myself. I zoned out, then spread out, then passed out. The stumble to the bathroom went okay, but the one coming out didn't turn out as well.
  My friend Scott is a medic in the Army. He's got as many mortifyingly hilarious stories as you might expect; some of my favorites are about his training. Mostly these are about doing unpleasant things to goats, but occasionally the trainees just do unpleasant things to each other. In one exercise partners take turns wearing inflatable pressure pants and dosing themselves with vasodilators, then abruptly pull the plug on the pants. If you do this — and I'm not suggesting that you do — all the blood will immediately drop out of the top half of your body and you'll go into shock (this is still a better gig than being an Army goat).
  That's pretty much what I felt like as I stumbled down the aisle, hung over, sleep deprived, blinded by the lavatory lights and generally out of it. I pawed at some unfortunate passengers' heads, desperately searching for any empty row that could plausibly be my own. It felt very, very good when I found one and collapsed into it. I woke up long enough to curse the Pittsburgh airport, then got home and slept through half the day.
- Also, I had super-birth-valentine's-day-stravaganza! I turned 28 on Friday, but was too busy being spoiled rotten by Emily to really notice. For Valentine's we went to `Salt & Pepper <http://www.saltandpepperphilly.com/>`__, where they fed us well and plied us with port and grappa. We went to `Southwark <http://www.southwarkrestaurant.com/>`__ afterward and did some self-plying. The birthday-day was even better (probably because I had no part in planning it): we went to `Dock Street <http://www.dockstreetbeer.com/>`__ and ate fancy pizza with some fine folks, saw *Jumper*, and grabbed a drink at `Chick's <http://www.chickscafe.com/>`__. I can recommend all of these things highly (although I admit I may be confusing the actual movie *Jumper* with the abstract concept of teleportation).
  Then: DC! Dave & Buster's! Giant stuffed frogs! My thanks to everybody who dared venture into what is probably the most hostile environment not currently being considered for hosting an international peacekeeping force. I had a great time, but it turns out that friends are better for talking to than they are for enlistment into ad-hoc anti-zombie strike forces (no offense, guys). So this is perhaps not going to be the first installment of an annual tradition. On the other hand, I still have an awful lot of credits on my Power Card...
